## Differences

The Famers of the Moor extension introduces a number of small changes that significantly increase complexity but also make it easier to collect points.
In particular, Felling Trees gives access to more Wood, the additional Major Improvements allow more flexibility in the use of resources, and accumulating Horses allows scoring many points (13 in my best game).

## My Best Game

The following lists the strategy considerations for my best Farmers of the Moor game (Family Version), in which I scored 87 points.

### Round Cards

* Sheep, Stone, and Boar occur as early as possible.
* Unfortunately, the rules allow Sheep in Round 2 only, which costs 2 Food that would be very helpful in the beginning.
* Cattle occurs after Stone because building improvements is more important than cooking Cattle.

### Special Action Cards

* Cut Peat is used once each in Stage 1, 2, and 3.
  Additionally Slash and Burn is used in Stage 1 and 3 (to save actions).
  (I could not find a way to get the needed 2 Food early enough to use Slash and Burn in Stage 2 also.)
* 2 Hiring Fairs are used in Stage 1 (to obtain 3 Food).
* Horse Coper is used once in Stage 1 (to activate the Kiln).
* Clandestine Work is used once each in Stage 2 and 3 (to save actions).
* Felling Trees is used once in Stage 2 (to get 2 extra Wood for a Stable).
* In Stage 4-6, the with Horse Coper and Fell Trees is locked.
  It is used twice in all 5 Rounds (to collect as many Horses as possible).
  This yields 8 Horses because we need to Fell Trees twice.

### Family

* I Grow quickly (Stage 2) to 4 Rooms and Family Members.
* A 5th Room seems to be unrealistically expensive (no matter what kind).
  Besides, I need the space for animals.

### Produce

* I Sow as much as possible under the constraint that
 I have 5 Fields in total, the 5th one Plowed at the end using Plow And Sow.
 I only take Grain twice and Vegetables once.
* This yields the following time line
 Plow 2 Fields in Stage 1 and Sow 2 Grain,
    resow them in Stage 4 with Grain and Vegetable,
    resow the latter in Stage 6 with Vegetable.
 Plow 2 Fields in Stage 3 and Sow 2 Grain,
    resow 2 Grain in Stage 6.
 Plow And Sow one Field with Vegetable in Stage 6.
* This totals 10 Sowings (7 Grain, 3 Vegetable) yielding 16 Grain and 4 Vegetable.
  Schematically the 5 fields are sown as follows in the stages 1346: G-G-, G-VV, -G-G, -G-G, ---V.
* That maxes out the points for Fields, Grains, Vegetables and leaves 8 Grain for Baking.

### Animals

* Some sheep are taken and cooked in Stage 2.
  All other Sheep, Boar, and Cattle are taken in Round 13 or 14.
  Horses are taken whenever possible.
* The only way to maximize the points is to collect as many Horses as possible.
  So I use a 2 Space Pasture with 2 Stables allowing for 16 Horses.
  In my best game so far I reached 13 Horses.
* Using 6 Spaces for Pastures in total, the maximal score for the remaining animals is 9 points.
  This can be achieved with 8 Sheep (2 Space Pasture with Stable), 3 Boar (1 Space Pasture and Pet), and 4 Cattle (2 Space Pasture with Stable).
  I think this is also the cheapest combination in the sense of providing the most food from cooking surplus animals.
* This leaves 6 Sheep, 5 Boar, 1 Cattle for Cooking yielding 27-33 Food (depending on whether a Cooking Hearth is built).
* This yields 17 points for Pastures, Stables, Sheep, Boar, Cattle and up to 16 points for Horses.

### Food

* Food needs are
  * 6+10+12+12+15+15=70 for Family Members
  * As often as possible 2 Food for a second Special Action (currently 7 times).
  * About 2 Food for Clandestine Work.
  * About 2 Food for the Horse Coper.
  which totals 86 Food.
* I buy the Clay Oven early to bake 8 Grain into up to 40 Food.
* Some sheep are cooked in Stage 2.
  Other surplus animals are cooked in Stage 5 or 6.
* Additional minor income is generated by
  * Around 5 Food by the Well.
  * Around 9 Food by Fishing.
  * Possibly 3 Food by the Basketmaker.
  * About 5 Food by the Day Laborer (which is needed anyway to gain enough building resources).
  * Around 3 Food from Hiring Fair.

### Fuel

* Assuming renovations in Stage 3 and 5, Fuel needs are
  * 2+4+3+3+2+2=16 for Heating.
  * About 2 Fuel for Clandestine Work.
  * 5 Fuel to collect the bonus points of the Kiln.
  which totals 20 Fuel.
* Fuel income is generated
  * 15 Fuel from Cutting Peat using the Kiln and an early Horse.
  * 2 Fuel gained and 3 Fuel saved by building the Furnace in Stage 4.
  * 3 Wood converted to Fuel at the end.

### Improvements

* The Kiln is built in Stage 1 to optimize Cutting Peat.
* A Fireplace is built in Stage 2 to cook Sheep and upgraded to a Cooking Hearth in Stage 5.
* The Museum of the Moor is built for points and to save resources when building improvements.
  Overall I gain 1 Stone from building it.
* The Clay Oven is built in Stage 3 to bake 8 Grain into up to 40 food.
* The Furnace is built to improve Fuel efficiency (currently Stage 4).
* The Well, Stone Oven, and Basketmaker's Workshop are built for points and minor Food gains.

### Wood

* Wood is taken 3 times
  * in the beginning for 2 Rooms and possibly a stable,
  * in the middle for Fences for Horses,
  * at the end for the remaining Fences.
* At least 30 Wood are needed:
  * 10 for 2 Rooms
  * 15 for Fences
  * 4-5 for Stables
  * 1 for the Well
* Optionally, we may convert some wood to fuel to get the bonus points of the Kiln.
* The last Wood is taken in Round 13 or 14, and 6 additional Wood are generated by Felling Trees 3 times.

### Clay

* 11 Clay are needed for renovation (4) and improvements (2+2+1+1+1).
* 2 early Clay are obtained using the Day Laborer.
* The remaining Clay are obtained by taking Clay in Round 9.

### Reed

* At least 13 Reed are needed for rooms (4), renovation (2), improvements (1+1), bonus points (5).
* 1 additional Reed may be coverted to 3 Food.
* Reed is taken 2 times
  * in the beginning for 2 rooms
  * in the end for the rest
* 1 additional early Reed is obtained from the Day Laborer.

Stone
* 14 Stones are needed for renovation (4) and improvements
  * Well: 2
  * Stone Oven: 2
  * Basketmaker's Workshop: 2
  * Kiln: 1
  * Museum of the Moor: 1
  * Clay Oven: 1
  * Furnace: 1
* Stones are taken as late as possible
* 2 early Stones are obtained from the Day Laborer.
